Add tutorial about using multiple cloud services (#2424)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/cloud/pouta/tutorials/image-pipeline.md

# Setting up a pipeline for images

## Objectives

* Get familiarity on how to use multiple cloud services together.
* Get familiarity on how to use cloud services using their command-line interfaces.

The tutorial focuses on the following services:

* Allas
* cPouta

> * Pukki

Reviewer: Please add a short explanation of what is each service like.
Also add  link to the main page of each service. The more linked together is the documentation, the better.
Like:

 "[Allas](/data/allas/index.md), our object storage service. We will use it for storing the files".

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/6dd0e754b0bd7109448f9375cfa5971b78ef747c

## Introduction

We want to set up a simple pipeline which transforms the images that are given in input to it.

![image-pipeline-diagram](../../img/image-pipeline-diagram.png)

> We use Allas as the place where to upload our images in input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use Allas as the place to upload our images ( i.e. input).
```
I am not married to my sentence, but your sounds redundant.

Author: Text reorganized in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/639462dbd338c7cc1a095593ed66cf5ab22ef700

The pipeline uploads its transformed images to Allas too.
A virtual machine in cPouta takes care of downloading, transforming, and re-uploading the images received in input.

> Once it has transformed an image, the virtual machine also logs the event to a database hosted in Pukki.

Reviewer: I think you should use the same order as in the schema (upload to bucket, download to vm, log action, upload to bucket, download output.

Author: Text reorganized in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/639462dbd338c7cc1a095593ed66cf5ab22ef700

We can test the correct functioning of the command-line interface by simply listing all the buckets currently in our project.
An example of the command and its expected output follows:
```
$ s3cmd ls
2021-07-14 15:14  s3://bucket1
2020-01-14 17:40  s3://bucket2
...
```
Please note that the list can also be empty, if we haven't created any bucket in our project before.

We create the input and the output buckets for our pipeline using the following commands:
```
$ s3cmd mb s3://input_bucket
Bucket 's3://input_bucket/' created
$ s3cmd mb s3://output_bucket
Bucket 's3://output_bucket/' created
```

!!! warning
    Bucket names must be unique.
    If another user has already selected the same name, bucket creation command will fail:
    ```
    $ s3cmd mb s3://input_bucket
    ERROR: Bucket 'input_bucket' already exists
    ERROR: S3 error: 409 (BucketAlreadyExists)
    ```
    In such case, we can just select a different name and retry the command.

In the rest of the tutorial, we assume:

* the name of the bucket used for uploading images to the pipeline is `input_bucket`

> * the name of the bucket used by the pipeline to make available its outputs is `output_bucket`

Author: after discussion, removed the need for these sentences in favor of usage of environment variables. This should be implemented in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/9b1b28a56261b814d7262c0afb27932b6881381e

> ## Step 2: creating database in Pukki

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: creating a database in Pukki
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/ab98e67ebd3514e3c13b98b661e23d4523aab982

We open a second terminal window, to which we will refer using the name `terminal_B`.
We use `terminal_B` for all the commands dealing with Pukki.

> 

Reviewer 2: It might be a good idea to add some kind of sentence here about it is easy to mix up pukki and Pouta terminals because they both use the `openstack` command.

IDK if there are some good hack/one-liner to figure out if one is using Pouta or Pukki.

Author: Fix attempt in 6884a244b59ff144d7f2183c6c01976c387aa141

Having a working command-line interface for Pukki is a prerequisite for continuing with the tutorial.
If we haven't set it up before, we follow the [instructions on how to install and configure Pukki command-line interface](../../dbaas/cli.md#getting-started).

We can test the correct functioning of the command-line interface by simply listing the available types of database.
An example of the command and its expected output follows:
```
$ openstack datastore list
+--------------------------------------+------------+
| ID                                   | Name       |
+--------------------------------------+------------+
| 71920375-6967-466e-b955-8ee8629312b7 | postgresql |
| 1a8efda2-7bb7-4c52-9eab-e251fd18323c | mariadb    |
+--------------------------------------+------------+
```

> We now create the database that we use to log the actions of the pipeline by issuing the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now create the database that we will use to log the actions of the pipeline by issuing the following command:
```

Added the future tense, otherwise the sentence sounded weird.

```
$ openstack database instance create pipeline_db_instance \
--flavor standard.small \
--databases pipeline_db \
--users db_admin:db_password \
--datastore postgresql \
--is-public \
--size 1

> ```

Author: This should be fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/8e2c3af07c2cd5845c4fbfe33aa913d5cc57bd66

| datastore                | postgresql                           |
| datastore_version        | 17.2                                 |
| datastore_version_number | 17.2                                 |
| flavor                   | d4a2cb9c-99da-4e0f-82d7-3313cca2b2c2 |
| id                       | 2f347948-9460-4ac0-a588-32187c8b6ab1 |
| name                     | pipeline_db_instance                 |
| operating_status         |                                      |
| public                   | True                                 |
| region                   | regionOne                            |
| service_status_updated   | 2025-02-04T13:08:51                  |
| status                   | BUILD                                |
| updated                  | 2025-02-04T13:08:51                  |
| volume                   | 1                                    |
+--------------------------+--------------------------------------+
```

In the rest of the tutorial, we assume that:

* the name of the database instance in Pukki is `pipeline_db_instance`
* the name of the postgresql database is `pipeline_db`
* the username for the admin of the postgresql database is `db_admin`

> * the password for the admin of the postgresql database is `db_password`

Reviewer: It is recommended to always encourage users to have complex passwords.

Author: after discussion, this should be now fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/9b1b28a56261b814d7262c0afb27932b6881381e

## Step 3: creating virtual machine in cPouta

We open a third terminal window, to which we will refer using the name `terminal_C`.
We use `terminal_C` for all the commands dealing with cPouta.

In the same way as for Allas and Pukki, to continue the tutorial we need to have a working command-line interface for cPouta as well.

> We follow the [instructions on how to install and configure cPouta command-line interface](../install-client.md), if we haven't done it already.

Author: Fix attempted in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/78a6e695e81202be5837e4e263eef2b4b613a250

| OS-FLV-DISABLED:disabled   | False                                |
| OS-FLV-EXT-DATA:ephemeral  | 0                                    |
| access_project_ids         | None                                 |
| disk                       | 80                                   |
| id                         | 0143b0d1-4788-4d1f-aa04-4473e4a7c2a6 |
| name                       | standard.tiny                        |
| os-flavor-access:is_public | True                                 |
| properties                 | standard='true'                      |
| ram                        | 1000                                 |
| rxtx_factor                | 1.0                                  |
| swap                       |                                      |
| vcpus                      | 1                                    |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
```

First, we create a keypair, which we will use to access the virtual machine once it is up and running.
To create a new keypair, we run the following command:
```
openstack keypair create mykeypair > mykeypair.pem
```

> 

Reviewer: You can add a info box to link to the web interface method of creating a key pair.

Reviewer: To the documentation we have that explains it.

Author: After discussion, decided to drop adding links to gui alternatives

| status                      | BUILD                                                |
| updated                     | 2025-02-04T13:10:43Z                                 |
| user_id                     | timo                                                 |
| volumes_attached            |                                                      |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
```

In the rest of the tutorial we assume that the name of the virtual machine in cPouta is `pipeline_vm`.

## Step 4: configuring the pipeline

Now that we have built all the components, we configure them to work as a pipeline.
First, we configure the virtual machine to allow us to access it from our workstation.
Then, we make sure that the virtual machine can work with the buckets in Allas, as well as that our database instance in Pukki accepts traffic coming from the virtual machine.
Finally, we install and configure in the virtual machine the tools required to get the pipeline working.

### Allowing traffic from workstation to virtual machine

Access to the virtual machine is regulated by means of _security groups_ and the rules they contain.

> We thus create a new security group with a single rule, which allow access to the virtual machine, for example, from our workstation.

Reviewer: Later the command in the example creates a rule that allows any IP `0.0.0.0/0`. The sentence above is misleading. 

I think that given that this is an advanced article, the user should be able to understand the procedure. In <https://docs.csc.fi/cloud/dbaas/cli/#creating-a-database-instance> it is explained.

Reviewer: Also it should be explained the extra security that it gives. And the consequences of not doing so.

Author: Fix attempted in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/ee48e095a5e4ee808c3ac1b956a5e88186057add and https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/740686c2d16a051b75d1508761153ebb413cd9b8

| security_group_id | a8630776-db3d-408a-ba8e-8c52b5f2a8c9                                                                                                                                       |
| tags              | []                                                                                                                                                                         |
| updated_at        | 2025-02-04T13:13:04Z                                                                                                                                                       |
+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

Now we apply the security group to the previously created virtual machine, so that this newly-created rule applies to its traffic.
```
$ openstack server add security group pipeline_vm pipeline_security_group
```
In case of success, the command will show no output.

### Connecting to the virtual machine

> The virtual machine is now configured to allow traffic from our workstation but it is not reachable yet because it has no address assigned to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The virtual machine is now configured to allow traffic from our workstation but it is not reachable yet because it has no public IP address assigned to it.
```

It should be clarified that VM need a public ip and that VMs only get private IPs by default.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/024dc7859b0230ca1fbff7675d9101169380862c

> We go back to `terminal_C`.

Reviewer 2: I have already forgotten which `terminal_C` is maybe name them `terminal_pouta` , `termianl_pukki` and `terminal_allas` .

Reviewer: I agree

Author: Fixed in 16c117e3673ddafd9a10ff585ecf378bfd1b06db

| dns_name            | None                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| fixed_ip_address    | None                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| floating_ip_address | 1.2.3.4                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| floating_network_id | 26f9344a-2e81-4ef5-a018-7d20cff891ee                                                                                                                                                                 |
| id                  | 1a38ae4f-1354-4958-b2be-72502b53c492                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | location            | Munch({'cloud': '', 'region_name': 'regionOne', 'zone': None, 'project': Munch({'id': 'ef20bcc4215d49ddbf33e5c5740d89fe', 'name': 'project_2003103', 'domain_id': 'default', 'domain_name': None})}) |

Reviewer: Maybe mask also the project number

Author: Fixed in 20d01de112a6d165e495760b90848a3772ad32c0

| name                | 1.2.3.4                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| port_details        | None                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| port_id             | None                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | project_id          | ef20bcc4215d49ddbf33e5c5740d89fe                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: Probably mask the project ID

Author: Fixed in 0c5911b41524e27882d1fe05c6e9d85d878a1ca8

| status              | DOWN                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| subnet_id           | None                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| tags                | []                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| updated_at          | 2025-02-04T13:13:38Z                                                                                                                                                                                 |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

> In particular, we note down the value returned for the field `floating_ip_address`, which in this case corresponds to the dummy value `1.2.3.4`.

Reviewer 2: You are using the `1.2.3.4` many times, in these cases I would usually use `$FLOATING_IP` as a placeholder, IDK if it s better method.

I also feel that this tutorial is pretty advanced. I think this section might be possible to  replaces with `log in with the ubuntu user to floating ip of the instances.

Reviewer: I commented something like that before. Instead of using dummy values, refer to environment variables in the examples.
It is also important to explicitly tell the user to declare the variables, what to put there, and an example of command. Otherwise people run the commands with empty variables.

From the information displayed with the previous command we also extract and take down the public IP address of our database instance, which we will need in the following steps.
The first row, whose name is `addresses`, contains two parts: an address that is marked as `private`, and one that is marked as `public`.
We are interested in the second one, so we note down `5.6.7.8`, which is a dummy value selected for the purpose of this tutorial.

### Configuring access from virtual machine to Allas

Similarly to our own workstation, to access the buckets hosted in Allas the virtual machine needs to be configured as well.

We go back to `terminal_C`, where we are still logged in to our virtual machine in cPouta, and we follow the [instructions on how to install and configure s3cmd](../../../data/Allas/using_allas/s3_client.md#getting-started-with-s3cmd).
It basically boils down to running the following commands:
```
$ sudo apt update

$ sudo apt install python3-openstackclient s3cmd

$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSCfi/allas-cli-utils/master/allas_conf

$ source allas_conf --mode S3 --user your-csc-username

> ```

Reviewer: This should be on the first mention of the link, not the second.

Author: Fix proposed in beaa887d395603c23fcc85628d8d5f9bda98bf53

Need to get 11.6 kB of archives.
After this operation, 17.4 kB of additional disk space will be used.
Get:1 http://nova.clouds.archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu noble-updates/main amd64 postgresql-client all 16+257build1.1 [11.6 kB]
Fetched 11.6 kB in 0s (47.3 kB/s)             
Selecting previously unselected package postgresql-client.
(Reading database ... 117863 files and directories currently installed.)
Preparing to unpack .../postgresql-client_16+257build1.1_all.deb ...
Unpacking postgresql-client (16+257build1.1) ...
Setting up postgresql-client (16+257build1.1) ...
Scanning processes...                                                                                                                                                                    
Scanning linux images...                                                                                                                                                                 

Running kernel seems to be up-to-date.

No services need to be restarted.

No containers need to be restarted.

No user sessions are running outdated binaries.

No VM guests are running outdated hypervisor (qemu) binaries on this host.

> ```

Reviewer 2: IMO Install postgresql-client 

```
sudo apt update ; sudo apt install postgresql-client
```

should be enough

Author: Fixed in cdd97869bd1a29e958b9b243d02f2911e979faa4

We then prepare a script with the information on how to reach and access the database hosted in Pukki.

> On `terminal_C` we type the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sill on `terminal_C` we type the following:
```

Otherwise is confusing.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/bc111024bc06c203eea12d7e3af4fe02c8fe2da3

```
$ nano db_cred.sh
```
We see a blinking cursor on the top-left corner of the window, indicating that the terminal is ready to receive our input.
We write in the terminal what follows:
```
#!/bin/bash
export DB_HOST="5.6.7.8"
export DB_PORT="5432"
export DB_NAME="pipeline_db"
export DB_USER="db_admin"
export PGPASSWORD='db_password'

> ```

Reviewer: Postgres has its own config file that is loaded automatically. Maybe it is a better and easier approach?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/9b1b28a56261b814d7262c0afb27932b6881381e

From the terminal we are asked if we want to save our changes, to which we reply by pressing the key `y`.
Finally, it is given to us a chance to modify the name of the file in which our text is saved.
We are happy with the current name of the file, so we just type `Enter` key, and we are back to our typical terminal view.

Let's now test the access to the database.
On `terminal_C` we run the following two commands:
```
$ source db_cred.sh
$ psql -h "$DB_HOST" -p "$DB_PORT" -U "$DB_USER" -d "$DB_NAME"
```
After entering the second command we get the following prompt, which indicates successful connection to the database:
```
psql (16.6 (Ubuntu 16.6-0ubuntu0.24.04.1), server 17.2 (Debian 17.2-1.pgdg110+1))
WARNING: psql major version 16, server major version 17.
         Some psql features might not work.
SSL connection (protocol: TLSv1.3, cipher: TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384, compression: off)
Type "help" for help.

pipeline_db=>
```
To go back to our virtual machine we just type `exit` and press `Enter` key.

Now that we can communicate with the database, we prepare it to host the data that we will send to it when processing our images.
On `terminal_C` we run the following command:
```

> $ psql -h "$DB_HOST" -p "$DB_PORT" -U "$DB_USER" -d "$DB_NAME" -c "CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS log_records (timestamp varchar(25) primary key, negated_image_name text, negated_image_hash text)"

Reviewer: Please cut this complex command is several lines with `\` to show better without horizontal scrolling.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/bc111024bc06c203eea12d7e3af4fe02c8fe2da3

# iterate over the images in the bucket
for IMAGE_URL in `s3cmd ls s3://$INPUT_BUCKET | awk '{ print $4 }'`
do
        # get the current timestamp
        TIMESTAMP=$(date +%FT%T)
        # get the image
        IMAGE_NAME=$(echo "$IMAGE_URL" | awk -F '/' '{ print $NF }')
        s3cmd get $IMAGE_URL $IMAGE_NAME
        # compute the negated
        NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME="$NEGATED_PREFIX$IMAGE_NAME"
        convert -negate $IMAGE_NAME $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME
        # compute hash of the result
        NEGATED_IMAGE_HASH=$(sha256sum $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME | awk '{ print $1 }')
        # log to the db that this was done
        psql -h "$DB_HOST" -p "$DB_PORT" -U "$DB_USER" -d "$DB_NAME" -c "INSERT INTO log_records (timestamp, negated_image_name, negated_image_hash) VALUES ('$TIMESTAMP', '$NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME', '$NEGATED_IMAGE_HASH')"
        # push the negated image to the output bucket
        s3cmd put $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME s3://$OUTPUT_BUCKET
        # delete the local copies of the images
        rm $IMAGE_NAME $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME
        # delete the image from the input bucket
        s3cmd del $IMAGE_URL
        # sleep 1 sec
        sleep 1
done
) 200>/var/lock/pipeline_script_lock

> ```

Reviewer: Please use shellcheck for bash or sh scripts:
```sh
$ shellcheck shell.sh

In shell.sh line 6:
source /home/ubuntu/db_cred.sh
       ^---------------------^ SC1091 (info): Not following: /home/ubuntu/db_cred.sh was not specified as input (see shellcheck -x).

In shell.sh line 14:
for IMAGE_URL in `s3cmd ls s3://$INPUT_BUCKET | awk '{ print $4 }'`
                 ^-- SC2006 (style): Use $(...) notation instead of legacy backticks `...`.

Did you mean: 
for IMAGE_URL in $(s3cmd ls s3://$INPUT_BUCKET | awk '{ print $4 }')

In shell.sh line 20:
        s3cmd get $IMAGE_URL $IMAGE_NAME
                  ^--------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.
                             ^---------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        s3cmd get "$IMAGE_URL" "$IMAGE_NAME"

In shell.sh line 23:
        convert -negate $IMAGE_NAME $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME
                        ^---------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.
                                    ^-----------------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        convert -negate "$IMAGE_NAME" "$NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME"

In shell.sh line 25:
        NEGATED_IMAGE_HASH=$(sha256sum $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME | awk '{ print $1 }')
                                       ^-----------------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        NEGATED_IMAGE_HASH=$(sha256sum "$NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME" | awk '{ print $1 }')

In shell.sh line 29:
        s3cmd put $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME s3://$OUTPUT_BUCKET
                  ^-----------------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        s3cmd put "$NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME" s3://$OUTPUT_BUCKET

In shell.sh line 31:
        rm $IMAGE_NAME $NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME
           ^---------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.
                       ^-----------------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        rm "$IMAGE_NAME" "$NEGATED_IMAGE_NAME"

In shell.sh line 33:
        s3cmd del $IMAGE_URL
                  ^--------^ SC2086 (info): Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting.

Did you mean: 
        s3cmd del "$IMAGE_URL"

For more information:
  https://www.shellcheck.net/wiki/SC1091 -- Not following: /home/ubuntu/db_cr...
  https://www.shellcheck.net/wiki/SC2086 -- Double quote to prevent globbing ...
  https://www.shellcheck.net/wiki/SC2006 -- Use $(...) notation instead of le...
```

Author: Almost completely fixed in 9853aae2485e4c085a3ff2f9c3ffba5f9da6aec4 - only first warning is left, but removing it depends on addressing issues raised by other comments

Author: Now completely fixed in https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/2424/commits/9b1b28a56261b814d7262c0afb27932b6881381e

On `terminal_C` we run the following commands:
```
$ chmod +x /home/ubuntu/pipeline_script.sh
$ crontab -l > crontab_list
$ echo "* * * * * /home/ubuntu/pipeline_script.sh" >> crontab_list
$ crontab crontab_list
```

Now the script is configured to run automatically every minute.
We are ready to test the functioning of the pipeline.

## Step 5: testing the pipeline

We pick up an image of choice and we copy it to the home folder of our workstation.
As an example, here is our image at `~/cat1.jpg`:

![image-cat](../../img/cat1.jpg)

We now want to send the image through the pipeline.
On `terminal_A`, we first navigate to the home folder and then upload the image to Allas:
```
$ cd ~
$ s3cmd put cat1.jpg s3://input_bucket
upload: 'cat1.jpg' -> 's3://input_bucket/cat1.jpg'  [1 of 1]
 133275 of 133275   100% in    0s     2.47 MB/s  done
```

We wait a minute or so, we check the content of `input_bucket`, and we notice that it is empty.
```
$ s3cmd ls s3://input_bucket
$
```
The pipeline has thus taken the image from `input_bucket` and processed it.

We check if we have a trace of the image transformation in the database.
On `terminal_C` we run the following command:
```

> $ psql -h "$DB_HOST" -p "$DB_PORT" -U "$DB_USER" -d "$DB_NAME" -c "select * from log_records where negated_image_name like '%cat1%'"

Reviewer: Same as above, cut the command in lines with `\` so it can be read better.

Author: Fixed in 7d67181791f56e3c02674275ab20fef7c6583629
